From The New York Times, I'm Natalie
[music] Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
Starting right here in California.
These billionaires are going to learn
that we are still living in a democratic
[music] society where the people have
some power.
A landmark proposal for a one-time tax
on [music] billionaires in California
reached a milestone this week.
It got enough signatures [music] to put
the measure to a vote.
Those who have prospered from here in
California can afford to invest a little
more in keeping [music] California
running. Proponents say it's necessary
to right the wrongs of an unequal
[music] system. It's like the Democrats
are doing everything they can to get me
to leave the state. I don't want to.
>> [laughter]
>> Opponents say it's going to drive rich
taxpayers out of the [music] state.
>> It's an idiotic concept that is nothing
more than than political positioning.
But it's not [music] just Republicans
and the ultra-wealthy who are against
it. It's also a surprising group of
Democrats.
Today, my [music] colleague Laurel
Rosenhall lays out how California
arrived at this moment and what it might
mean for the fight over inequality
nationwide. [music]
>> [music]
>> It's Wednesday, April 29th.
>> Laurel, welcome back to the show. It's
great to have you here. Great to be
here. Thank you. So, we have you here
because we got word this week that a
historic tax on billionaires appears to
have gotten enough signatures to be put
to voters in California in November. So,
just tell us why that matters at a
fundamental level. Well, this is coming
at a moment when there is a lot of
anxiety about economic inequality. You
know, a lot of people are feeling
squeezed about affordability. In
California, the electorate is very
anti-Trump and feeling somewhat angry
about some of the cuts that he's done
and the ways that he seems to be
favoring billionaires. And so, people
are feeling emotional about that.
>> Hmm. And this tax has ignited a big
pushback from many billionaires who are
spending tens of millions of dollars to
fight it. And the scope of this tax and
the structure of this tax is very
unusual, and that's part of the reason
it's just generating such a firestorm.
Okay, let's start there with the unusual
structure of it. Just explain what the
measure would do.
So, this would place a 5% tax on the net
worth of any billionaires who are
California residents as of January 1st
of this year.
The money would go into a special fund
at the state level and would have to be
spent on healthcare services. Mhm. It's
unusual to tax the assets of a person as
opposed to their income. So, their
assets would be, you know, their stocks,
the jewelry they own, the cars in their
garage, the paintings, Hmm. anything
that contributes to their wealth.
Notably, it does not include residential
property, so that's kind of an
interesting exemption. And then it's
also unusual on the revenue side to
create a special fund where the money
would go and that it could only be used
for this one purpose. So, unlike most of
the tax dollars that the state collects,
which go into what's called the general
fund and then the elected leaders of the
state government decide how to spend it,
this is requiring that 90% of it be
spent specifically on healthcare.
What does that actually mean? Like, does
that go to the money that people are
spending on their healthcare?
The concept is that the supporters of
this tax want to make up for the massive
amount of funding that has been cut by
the federal government through what
Republicans called their big beautiful
bill. The cuts that were in that bill
that Trump signed last year were related
to Medicaid and Obamacare subsidies, and
those health insurance programs pumped a
huge amount of money into the healthcare
system writ large. So, for the
supporters of this tax, they say this
money is essential to keep hospitals
open, to keep emergency rooms operating,
and to keep the healthcare system that
Californians rely on operating at the
same level that it has been before these
cuts go into place. So, just to put a
fine point on it, what's unusual about
this initiative is that one, it's taxing
assets, and that's really different.
Normally, the way people raise taxes on
rich people is to tax their income. And
the other thing that's unusual is that
the vast majority of it, 90% of the
money, would go to this one purpose,
healthcare.
Right. And this is happening in a state
that has more billionaires than any
other state. So, the supporters of this
tax say that it would affect about 200
people. However, there are, you know,
various wealth management kind of
experts that I've interviewed over the
last few months, and they've told me
they think the number is probably
higher. Hmm. But right now, you know, no
one has like an exact count on how many
people would have to pay this.
And so, how has this been received in
California? Well, you know, it got a
1.5 million signatures. So, there were
at least that many people who liked the
idea enough to sign a petition. You
know, I've been out with different
petition circulators watching this thing
in public parks and in front of grocery
stores, and the idea of taxing
billionaires, especially when you just
kind of say it in one sentence like
that, it's real easy for people to sign
on the dotted line. In polling shows
that more than half of voters support
it. More than 70% of Democrats support
it in California.
But even though it has a lot of support
seemingly from the public, there are a
lot of high-profile Democrats who have
come out against it and a lot of unions
who are just sitting on the sidelines.
And some of that has to do with how this
whole thing came about. Interesting. So,
how did it come about?
>> [music]
>> This tax is being proposed by a specific
union called the SEIU-UHW.
Stands for Service Employees
International Union United Healthcare
Workers West. Kind of a mouthful. Mhm.
This union represents
hospital workers, including janitors,
cooks, and various healthcare
technicians.
And they're really concerned that the
Medicaid cuts from President Trump last
year are going to lead to widespread
closures of ER rooms and hospitals in
the places where they work. And the
leader of the union is named Dave Regan,
and he has a real long history of using
ballot initiatives in his labor
negotiation process. And he came up with
this idea for this billionaire tax and
teamed up with some very respected
economists from different universities
around the country and put this proposal
together really on his own. Basically,
this is coming from something like a
maverick operator in the world of
unions. And when he starts this thing,
it's not like he has a huge coalition
behind him. Yeah, so they're working on
building a coalition. They got the
support of Bernie Sanders. He flew out
to LA and led this rally that was really
well attended and energetic. And the
union started pouring millions of
dollars into gathering these signatures.
They trained a bunch of volunteers. And
pretty much anyone who's been, you know,
at a farmers market or grocery store in
California over the last few months has
probably seen someone with a clipboard
asking them for a signature on the
billionaire tax.
And my understanding is the billionaires
did not respond well to all this
momentum.
So, they started freaking out late last
year in advance of this January 1
deadline because the ballot measure says
that anyone who was a resident of
California on January 1 of this year
could be subject to this tax. So, at the
end of the year, there was a lot of
jockeying, and there were a few pretty
high-profile billionaires who made moves
to leave the state, to change their
official residency. Hmm. A couple of the
founders of Google relocated. Sergey
Brin moved to the Nevada side of Lake
Tahoe. Larry Page left for Florida. And
then also some of the people who are
really influential in the world of, you
know, investing in technology left.
David Sacks moved to Texas, and Peter
Thiel moved to Miami. I have to say,
this is always something that wealthy
people threaten to leave at any prospect
of a tax increase, but they don't always
follow through. In this case, you're
saying they actually did it.
At least a handful of them did, you
know? So, they did relocate. A lot of
them have multiple properties, so they
still have homes in California, but they
did change their official residence.
And then meanwhile, the billionaires who
want to remain in California have been
plotting about how to adjust to this
thing. Hm. And you know, how to
basically mitigate or reduce their tax
liability if it passes. By what? Moving
their jewels and boats and paintings and
stuff? What are we talking? Yes, exactly
that.
>> Woah. It was kind of wild. I I went to
this conference in Orange County a
couple months ago where a bunch of tax
advisers and wealth managers were
meeting, and one of the sessions they
had was basically kind of like how to
help your clients reduce their net
worth. So, suggestions that were like,
"Oh, move your Picasso out of your house
in Beverly Hills to your house in
Aspen." Or if you were carrying more
insurance than you needed on your
wife's, you know, six-figure diamond
necklace, that just reduce the insurance
policy to what it's actually worth cuz
that's what you'll be taxed on.
But, to be fair, there are people who
are just like, "Okay, fine, you know, we
live in California. This state has been
wonderful to us. If we have to pay more,
we will."
For those who are fighting it, what is
their argument for why this tax is such
a bad idea beyond just don't take my
money, I want it? So, they're really
drilling into the specifics of the way
that it's structured. Just the idea of
taxing assets and the requirement that
if this thing passes, you know, every
taxpayer in California will have to
declare if they're a billionaire or not.
And then if so, they will have to
declare the value of all of their
property and assets. And so, there are
people who just feel that that is wrong.
They're arguing that a retroactive tax,
because it would tax people who are in
the state as of January 1st, is
unconstitutional.
And a major argument from Silicon Valley
is that this tax would absolutely
devastate California's ability to
continue dominating in the world of
innovation. Their argument is basically
that the state has a lot to lose from
this tax, not just the billionaires.
Absolutely. All of those billionaires
who would have to pay this wealth tax on
their assets, they already pay lots of
income tax. And that income tax is what
keeps most of the state of California
running. It pays for schools and public
safety and roads and all of the other
things that the state funds. And that is
one of the reasons that Governor Gavin
Newsom is so vocally against this tax.
He's very concerned about a short-term
bump in tax revenue from the billionaire
tax, but a long-term loss from that
ongoing loss of income taxes from people
who leave.
Meanwhile, some of the most influential
unions in the state, the teachers union,
the umbrella group for SEIU, they
haven't publicly taken a position. And
privately, they're concerned about the
idea of a tax that gets locked up in
this special box and doesn't fund the
programs that most tax dollars do. So,
there's a lot of different angles of
potential concern. And that's also why
many of the Democratic candidates who
are running for governor have expressed
some reservations. Even while they're
saying, "We think that rich people
should pay more." They are raising
concerns about the structure of this
thing. Again, getting into the weeds
about how the money is spent. So, even
though this initiative seems like it
would go a long way toward establishing
potentially a new precedent, a new way
to tax the very rich and redistribute
that money, things that these folks
generally may agree with, they aren't on
board, it seems like, in part because of
the particularities of how this bill
came about and who specifically benefits
from it. Right.
>> [music]
>> And so, depending on how far this thing
goes,
we may wind up seeing a situation where
the billionaires luck out if they can
form an alliance with other groups that
are much more sympathetic to the voters.
I also want to say that this thing has a
lot of different [music] potential
outcomes.
But, there is the possibility [music]
here for a really strange bedfellows
kind of coalition to come together.
We'll be right back.
Laura, you said it was possible that the
billionaires could assemble a strange
bedfellows coalition to fight this tax.
Just talk about how exactly that would
work.
Well, I think we have to start off by
acknowledging that there are a lot of
chess pieces on this board, and we just
don't know exactly how it's going to
play out.
California has this ballot initiative
system that a lot of political actors
use as leverage to get what they want
out of the legislature and the governor.
And so, now that this thing has
qualified for the ballot, this is a
period over the next couple months where
there could be
some backroom negotiations to try to get
this thing off the ballot.
Sergey Brin and the committee that he
created, they have put money into a
couple of ballot measures that would
negate the billionaires tax. And it's
possible that those could be used as
leverage. Perhaps Governor Newsom gets
involved, and he could try to help
negotiate something that would keep this
from going on the ballot.
And then there's another path, which is
these things all go on the ballot, and
they duke it out in front of the voters.
And that would become a very expensive
campaign season where voters are
subjected to conflicting ballot measures
on these tax issues.
Let's talk about Newsom here, because I
think he's in a really interesting
position. On the one hand, it makes
sense that a potential 2028 contender
for the presidency doesn't want to
alienate billionaires.
But, it would also seem perilous for him
to stake out a position that it, at
least on the surface, might paint him as
not wanting to tax the wealthy at this
moment when economic populism is so
potent. So, talk to me about his
motivations and the position he finds
himself in. Well, I think you summarized
it exactly right. And that's why when he
does talk about this, he really focuses
on his objection to a state-specific
wealth tax.
And he does frequently say, "We ought to
have a conversation about a national
wealth tax." Leaving the door open to
the idea of a wealth tax if it was
applied evenly across the country. He's
trying to thread a needle there, right?
He's saying, "I'm not opposed to this
thing, but I'm opposed to a version that
puts California at a disadvantage. And
the way to handle this is at the
national level. That's the way to go
about this." Right. Without fully
committing that he would do it at the
national level, but say if we were going
to do it, that's what we should explore.
And it is worth noting that he has
opposed many wealth taxes in the past
when they've come up in the California
legislature.
>> [gasps]
>> The other thing he focuses on is that
California has a very progressive income
tax structure. And the state does levy a
lot of taxes on the wealthiest earners.
And saying that he agrees with the moral
argument to tax the rich.
He's again threading the needle.
Whereas, on the more progressive side of
the Democratic Party, you have people
like Bernie Sanders saying, "Look, don't
let the perfect be the enemy of the good
here. Taxing billionaires is good. Maybe
this isn't going to solve all of our
problems, solve inequality writ large,
but overall, we support this concept."
Obviously, Bernie Sanders doesn't have
to be the governor of California, but
you see the contrast there.
Exactly. And so, for Bernie Sanders, who
is, you know, deeply invested in the
idea of taxing billionaires and fighting
the oligarchy,
the particulars are of less concern to
him.
>> Mhm. The point is levying a tax on the
people who have so much to help people
who have less, he doesn't see any
problem with that.
What is the message, do you think, of
this fight in California for other
states that are pursuing populist
policies like this? I'm thinking of New
York, where Governor Hochul is proposing
a pied-à-terre tax. Because, on the one
hand, this tax, you said, has a lot of
support. And on the other, there is this
very loud opposition that seems to be
rooted in a fear of alienating
billionaires or losing them because the
state has become very reliant on these
ultra-wealthy people. Well, I think
there's a couple lessons we can take
away from this.
One is that the idea of sticking it to
the rich is very popular.
The other lesson is that it's still
really hard to pass and get across the
finish line because of all of the
particulars involved, because of the way
that a tax is structured, and because of
how influential
the billionaire class is in our society.
Right. The third lesson is that because
it's so hard, people who want to do this
kind of thing need a really broad base
of support to push it across the finish
line. And I think that is what we're
going to be seeing in California. That
will be tested over the next few months,
how strong the support is for this idea,
given how hard it is to go up against
these opponents. Can I just step back
and ask, given how imperfect this
measure is,
why have the billionaires been so
freaked out about it? Because, from what
you said, it sounds like it may have
actually been relatively straightforward
for them to move some of their wealth
elsewhere for a single year. It's also
just a one-time 5% tax. So, what about
this proposal is so scary to them? For
the billionaires, and also many tech
leaders who are not billionaires, but
who are aspirational,
they see this as a kind of an
existential threat, that it really would
set a precedent of going after the
wealth that people have earned and
taxing their possessions in a way that
really has never been done before. Hm.
On the other side, that is also part of
the motivation for this thing, to really
shift the paradigm in how
[clears throat] the government taxes
wealth and how the government gets
people to contribute to society. And in
a time when many wealthy people have
shifted their assets into various
accounts for tax dodging, that this
would be another way to go after the
real wealth that people have and try to
provide more for people in society who
have so little.
I think this measure is forcing a lot of
people into the uncomfortable territory
of reckoning with the moment we're in.
>> [music]
>> It's pushing the whole anxiety about the
billionaire class and economic
inequality [music]
right to the forefront.
>> [music]
>> Well, Laurel, thank you so much. Thanks
for having me.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
Earlier today, a grand jury in the
Eastern District of North Carolina
returned a true bill indicting Mr. James
Comey with committing two felonies.
>> [music]
>> The Trump administration has secured a
new indictment against one of the
president's biggest enemies, former FBI
Director James Comey,
>> [music]
>> months after its last indictment against
Comey ended in failure. He knowingly
[music] and willfully making a threat to
take the life of and to inflict bodily
harm upon
the president of the United States.
Count two.
>> This time, the Justice Department
charged Comey with making a threat
against Trump because of a photo Comey
shared on social media of seashells
arranged on a beach to say 86 47.
Since 86 can be slang for removing
something, and Trump is the 47th
president, allies of the president have
construed the photo as a threat to kill
Trump. Threatening the life of the
president of the United States will
never be tolerated by the Department of
Justice.
Comey has repeatedly denied threatening
to harm the president. I'm still
innocent. [music]
I'm still not afraid, and I still
believe in the independent federal
judiciary, so let's go.
>> [music]
>> And Mr. Speaker, their majesties, King
Charles III and Queen Camilla.
In a speech to Congress on Tuesday, King
Charles delivered an optimistic
assessment of the relationship between
the US [music] and Britain at a moment
in which that relationship is arguably
at its lowest point [music] in decades.
With the spirit of 1776 in our minds,
we can, perhaps, agree that we do not
always [music] agree.
In his speech, Charles declared that
disputes between the two nations have
defined [music] their shared history,
dating back to the American Revolution
against Britain in the 1770s. [music]
Indeed, the the very principle on which
your Congress was founded,
no taxation without representation,
was at once a fundamental disagreement
between [music] us,
and at the same time a shared democratic
value,
uh which you inherited from us.
Ours is a partnership born out of
dispute, [music]
but no less strong for it. After the
speech, President Trump hosted Charles
and his wife, Camilla, for dinner at the
White House. Before we really begin, I
want to congratulate
Charles on having made a [music]
fantastic speech today at Congress. He
got the Democrats to stand. I've never
been able to do that.
I couldn't believe it.
Today's episode was produced by Olivia
Nat, Shannon Lynn, Claire Tennisgetter,
[music]
and Jack Disidoro. It was edited by
Paige Cowett and Patricia Willens.
Contains music by Marion [music] Lozano.
Our theme music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Chris
Wood.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That's it for The Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.